Alright, let's learn how to manage optional features in Windows 10.
Now this can be a little bit confusing.
Why would it be confusing you're wondering?
Well, let me show you.
I'm going to come down to Cortana,
and let's ask Cortana that we want to work with optional features,
and the result we get is under System settings.
So if we give that a click that opens up the Windows 10 settings,
and we have some features,
but there may be features that you know darn well exist.
Client-side Hyper-V is a good example if you're running the
Pro or Enterprise SKUs of Windows 10, and this isn't getting us there,
and even if you click feature history it's going to show you what
optional features in that subset you might have installed,
but that's not what we want.
Similarly,
if we come back to Cortana and we type in add we have an
option for add or remove programs,
and that's an excellent way to uninstall software
that's previously been installed.
We can click to select it, and then click Uninstall and you're done.
Under apps and features there's manage optional features,
but that just brings us back to the original optional features dialog.
What we want is the Windows features control panel,
and a couple ways to do that, back at Cortana we could do Windows features,
and notice that the top result is to turn Windows features on
or off in the traditional Control Panel.
Here it is right here.
Alternatively,
in the apps and features setting under related
settings there's programs and features.
This opens up what used to be called the add remove programs
control panel in earlier versions of Windows,
and there's an option to turn Windows features on or off.
So those are the admittedly muddled ways to get to this particular dialog box,
and you can resize this to make it taller,
and then enabling or disabling features and sub-features is just
as easily accomplished as clicking your mouse,
okay?
Now that's how to do it graphically.
I have an instance of the PowerShell ISE up,
as you can see, and I have a script file called m07.
ps1.
I've placed this script file in your exercise files,
so you can use it yourself if you want to.
What I'm doing here, first of all, preliminarily,
if you don't know what the ISE is, it's a built-in program in Windows.
It itself is an optional program that's built-in
that allows you to create and edit, modify PowerShell script files,
and if you right-click the PowerShell icon you'll want to
choose run ISE as administrator to start it.
You want to periodically run update help in PowerShell because
PowerShell doesn't have any help to speak of initially,
and so you download it.
ErrorAction SilentlyContinue means if you run into maybe a help
file that's broken don't tell me about it,
just skip it and keep going.
On line 7 I'm using Get-Command to look at all cmdlets that have the noun,
WindowsOptionalFeature, and so in Windows 10 we actually have 3 cmdlets,
Disable that turns WindowsOptionalFeatures off,
Enable that installs them, and then Get that lists them.
If you want syntax help with a cmdlet you'll want to run Get-Help,
so I'm saying Get-Help on the Get-WindowsOptionalFeature cmdlet name,
and show me examples, and there's a number of examples here.
We don't need to go through them because I already know how to use the cmdlet.
To show all enabled optional features you're going to get an error if
you just run Get-WindowsOptionalFeature on its own.
You need to supply additional parameters.
Remember I mentioned that you can do online servicing,
which is in a running Windows instance,
or offline when you're working on a VHD or a Windows 10 Virtual Hard Disk file.
Well we're online, of course,
and then I'm using the PowerShell pipeline to take all the Windows
features that are available and filter them.
If you've ever used the Structured Query Language or SQL in relational
databases you're familiar with the Where clause.
Where-Object means that we want to look at all those features,
but only ones whose State property is enabled,
and we want to format the results in a table or tabular way.
So here are all the specific packages.
Package is the technical term.
The non-technical term is Windows Optional Features that
we can choose to enable or disable.
This is obviously a list of enabled ones,
and if you're familiar with ransomware and the
eternal blue x ploy and all of that,
that hinged on vulnerabilities in the SMB1 protocol,
and sadly that's enabled on my system.
I'm going to take care of that in just a minute.
If we want to look at only disabled features it's the same exact command,
but our Where clause is specifying State equals Disabled.
Okay?
To do a disable, like SMB1,
we could do Disable-WindowsOptionalFeature -FeatureName SMB1Protocol - Online.
Do you want to restart this computer to complete?
I'll answer no for now.
The RestartNeeded flag is true though,
and then to enable a feature I found a TelnetClient that,
just for the heck of it, I'm going to install for us now.
We can just select that.
Again, this is going to require a restart to go into effect.
The PowerShell approach here is awfully useful.
What if you want to disable the SMB1Protocol on 25 computers or 250 computers?
With PowerShell with just a few lines of code you can run this
Disable-WindowsOptionalFeature command in parallel across all those machines. Isn't that cool?